We were just about to explore
the world that maybe for
some of us is quite familiar.
For those of you new to JavaScript,
we are going to walk through
this quite pure language.
JavaScript becomes the most
popular language in the world,
because it runs in the web browser,
which is almost an operating system
level of available features to it.
So let's actually even draw that for
a second.
Another sort of schematic
diagram here of the web browser.
I think it'd be useful to keep
in this corner here for a bit.
That's very strange shape,
keep in the corner here.
Okay, so the only file type we can open
directly in the web browser, actually,
when you open a www.wikipedia.org,
whatever page, it's loading what file type
Alexa, what's the only file that you can
actually open directly in the web browser?
HTML.
HTML, exactly.
So it's literally, and we're doing
this mostly on our local computers,
that means on our computer itself,
but it's literally taking in, for
example, like app.html, loading it in.
And then that is being parsed, that means
line by line it's being interpreted,
read figured out what it says
by the HTML parser, there it is.
Okay, and then that is adding to
our C++ list of, look at that,
list of elements, there we go.
C++ list of elements,
those are added to by the HTML parser.
However, HTML is also where,
if we look at our HTML code there,
we can add a file of JavaScript code.
We always talk in hard parts,
if you ever watched it,
about JavaScript starts running, but how?
You know what?
It says running by us linking
a script of JavaScript code,
a file a JAVA script in our
HTML that's going to start our
JavaScript engine executing.
Here it is, says our java engine,
and look at this,
JavaScript engine is gonna have
a store of data that can be changed.
It's gonna have a thread of execution
that can thread through and
execute code line by line and run code.
What a dream, it's beautiful.
Let's do it.
But note, other than that,
Java is a pretty basic language.
I think it's very nice language,
there's a couple of very cool things.
We're gonna see that JavaScript lets us
have code saved and functions arbitrarily.
That means, without us directly
influencing it ourselves,
execute, run later on out of
order in which they were saved or
defined or stored,
known as asynchronicity, out of order.
On by the way, user actions happening.
When they do that,
they're gonna need to have the data from
when those functions were saved defined.
That's known as closure, that's our
favorite feature from JavaScript, right?
That's the backpack, there we go.
[LAUGH] So JavaScript though,
besides that, it's pretty basic language.
Sees data, runs code to change that data,
does it inside execution contexts
that will place many stores of data.
That is it, it's gonna become
profoundly powerful though,
if we can save data, change it, and then
use it maybe in the DOM, in a C++ list.
Which we know as soon as
anything's added here,
will be displayed as pixels on a webpage,
beautiful.
Note actually technically what's happening
there is the render engine is shooting out
an image of the page to the graphics card,
the graphics hardware 60 times a second.
Kind of cool, right, 60 times a second.
That's actually the output
of the web browser.
It's like throwing funneling out an image,
60 times a second to graphics card.
Okay, great.
So we know then, for our purposes,
we'll just keep it as like
a nice web page, there it is.
And that's our output, we are going to
have our DOM in purple from now on.
And a big change, there it is,
it's our C++ list of elements.
There it is, list of elements, beautiful.
The first thing we're adding here, Phil,
is what element from our
HTML which is not C++.
That's our HTML code.
I'm probably gonna just, yeah,
we are gonna run our HTML code first.
What's the first thing it adds
to our C++ list of nodes, Phil?
A script element or a script node?
Script, exactly.
Script, linking to which file?
App.js.
And Phil said it better than me there,
exactly.
A script node, perfect.
Now, that won't show anything on the page.
But we know that anything that's
added to the DOM will be added to
the page if it's a visual element.
And this is all handled by the core of the
web files of or web code of the browser.
Okay, beautiful.
Let's go into JavaScript.
Here we go.
JavaScript has a, well,
JavaScript, it has a memory for
storing data bit constrained here,
so we'll try and keep this tight.
And it has a call stack, That is going
to be a list of the functions that are
currently executing, currently running.
When we start off running JavaScript, so
I'm not gonna assume anything here, I know
hopefully many of you have seen hard
parts of JavaScript, maybe you haven't.
We know that JavaScript is going to,
when running, automatically be in
the global the whole file, so the call
stack will keep track of what's running.
And it's initially running all the code,
which is the global almost single
the overall file of code is a function
called global that is now running.
As soon as we start running a function,
it will be added to that
stack of functions being run,
that list of functions being run so
that we can keep track of where we are.
Okay, but let's start our very
first line of JavaScript here.
Let's start with who
would like to call on?
Let's have John.
You're up John,
what's our first line of Java?
So what are we storing in memory?
And note people, we're storing data,
and user interface engineering is all
about displaying content or data.
And be able to change it, I'm very
excited that we're storing some data,
that might be able to be changed.
John, go ahead.
First just interface with the pause, and
it's setting it to the undeclared,
That sounds very fancy already.
[LAUGH] Yes, so
we are going to in line 1 store, and
keep it simple for us John, So
it is setting it to the Hi then.
Yes, Hi, and then it'll hard for
me to write hand emoji,
so I'm not gonna do that for long.
So what are we gonna do,
Alexa, right after that?
Then we're gonna reassign
post to the string Hi.
Beautiful, reassign, much easier for
me to write there it is, perfect.
And now things immediately
get kind of interesting.
We have here, console log, post,
the value of post selector is what?
That string hi exclamation.
Beautiful, there it is.
Okay, this is interesting.
So, the console, first thing to say,
the console is not in JavaScript,
not a chance.
Let's have it over here, purple,
not meaning it's in the DOM,
just not in JavaScript.
There it is.
So that is to say,
it's not a JavaScript engine but
it is in our web browser as a whole.
So it actually sits as a separate
feature as part of the dev tools,
that somehow from JavaScript
we have access to it.
And we get access to it actually
automatically as soon as JavaScript loads
in the web browser, its memory gets
populated with a very useful object,
just a regular JavaScript
object by the name of console.
There it is.
And init is a function,
a method of the name
log,that when we run it by
putting params on the end,
ain't really doing all
that much in JavaScript.
Much more interestingly,
what it's doing is it's linked out
to the console where we then, so our log
here is really speaking to the console.
That's actually a whole
wealth of functions in here.
Does anybody know any other ones?
Yes, Phil, please Error Error, good cool.
I definitely know all of these.
[LAUGH] So I'm not gonna spell
them just in case, okay,
maybe it's error that some
of the error possibly, yes.
Yeah, exactly.
Yes, Justice, go ahead.
Table.
Table, yes.
I knew that one, table well done,
brilliant, table.
Each of these when run ain't
doing anything all that much
interesting in JavaScript.
And you got one?
Yeah, time.
Time.
He's a definitely all of them.
Yes, Paul, please.
Dir.
Dir, that dir, exactly, I knew that one.
I was recently taught that one, brilliant.
All of these are all
functions that when run,
they are what they call
technically web browser APIs.
That means they're features of
the web browser that we API
interface with from JavaScript, okay?
What are we gonna be displaying
here Alexa on our console.
The string Hi!
Exactly, perfect,
the string Hi exclamation mark.
So our console is a object full
of functions that are backdooring
out of JavaScript into another
part of the web browser.
Well, this might give us a clue.
I got some hope that we got this lovely
data that we can change in JavaScript and
can take that data and
maybe access our C++ object known as
the model of the page, the document.
Not just with HTML, it was a one-time
very intuitive load onto this object,
onto this list, but
perhaps we can do it with JavaScript.
And that would require that in JavaScript,
we had some sort of label for
that feature outside of
JavaScript called the DOM.
Maybe the object would be called DOM.
No, what's the object called, Phil?
Document.
Document, exactly.
We do get automatically in JavaScript
a regular old object by
the name of document.
And it's gonna have, folk, a hidden link.
Whenever you see in JavaScript hidden
links out to other parts of the web
browser, know that it's probably being
stored as a hidden property on an object.
We can't just have links out to other
parts of the web browser directly stored
in JavaScript.
What even is that as a structure,
as a way of storing stuff?
We can store, what data structures
can we store in JavaScript?
What data formats can we store?
Justus, what can we store in JavaScript?
1s and 0s?
Yeah, wow.
In JavaScript, I mean, you can
definitely store the number, so numbers.
Yes, what else John?
There is objects Objects,
perfect, strings, arrays.
Binary.
Yeah, we have Boolean, but
really we have nowhere is there
like hidden link,
nowhere is that linked to outside feature.
So the way we capture that
always is within an object.
In this case,
our object stored in the label document
is gonna have a hidden property
linking to this position in C++,
where we have our list of all
the elements on the page.
Beautiful, and it's going to be full
to the brim, or as we say in England,
just so you can spread a new word,
because it isn't normal phrase, but
it's gonna be chock a block with, [LAUGH]
I don't wanna be a clean show your parody.
Okay, a block full of functions
that when they run are gonna
check what's linked it's the C++
environment, C++ runtime,
in which we have a list of elements
that will auto be added to the page.
So it's gonna link to that whenever
we run a function on document like,
well there's a few, query selector, but
there's many, they are not going to do
only work in JavaScript, they're also
gonna have a look at the hidden link.
See it's a link to this model of
the page and do some work there,
which is just bloody fantastic.
We are gonna have access to this
C++ runtime from within JavaScript.
Wow, okay.
So, data and code to change is
only available in JavaScript.
A JavaScript file of code, added using
HTML, that's what we did, right?
That little script added the JavaScript
is in an entire run time.
It's got three weeks for you to run code.
Memory for storing data it can
then execute that code and
it can also have functions run later
asynchronously, which is really cool.